doc: Adds `mongodbatlas_api_key_project_assignment` documentation, examples and migration guide (#3465)
mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas: docs/guides/project-api-key-migration.md

---
page_title: "Migration Guide: Project API Key to API Key + Assignment"
---

# Migration Guide: Project API Key to API Key + Assignment

**Objective**: This guide explains how to migrate from the legacy `mongodbatlas_project_api_key` resource/data source to the more flexible and future-proof pattern of managing API keys and project assignments separately using `mongodbatlas_api_key` and `mongodbatlas_api_key_project_assignment`.

> ## Why do we have both `mongodbatlas_project_api_key` and the new pattern?

Reviewer: I was so happy to land on the PR first time and see this section was there! Thank you!

> Historically, the `mongodbatlas_project_api_key` resource allowed users to create and assign API keys to projects in a single step. However, this approach limited flexibility, especially for organizations managing many projects or requiring more granular control. The new pattern—creating API keys independently and assigning them to projects with `mongodbatlas_api_key_project_assignment`—offers greater flexibility, clarity, and aligns with best practices for infrastructure as code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Historically, the `mongodbatlas_project_api_key` resource allowed users to create and assign API keys to projects in a single step. However, this approach limited flexibility, especially for organizations managing many projects or requiring more granular control. The new pattern—creating API keys independently and assigning them to projects with `mongodbatlas_api_key_project_assignment` —offers greater flexibility, clarity, and aligns with best practices for infrastructure as code.
```

## Why should I migrate?
- **Flexibility:** Manage API keys and assignments independently.
- **Clarity:** Clear separation of key creation and project assignment.
- **Best Practices:** Aligns with Terraform and Atlas recommendations for resource management.

> 

Reviewer: I think we need a section like this
```suggestion
## Will `mongodbatlas_project_api_key` continue to work?

While this is not our recommended approach, you can still continue to use the `mongodbatlas_project_api_key` resource. If you are creating new configuration, use the `mongodbatlas_api_key_project_assignment` resource.
```

Author: added in [2771500](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/pull/3465/commits/2771500d954e987ce2a03c21417583b162e252a3)

## Will `mongodbatlas_project_api_key` continue to work?

While this is not our recommended approach, you can still continue to use the `mongodbatlas_project_api_key` resource. If you are creating a new configuration, use the `mongodbatlas_api_key_project_assignment` resource.

## Main Changes Between Patterns

> | Old Pattern (`mongodbatlas_project_api_key`) | New Pattern (`mongodbatlas_api_key` + `mongodbatlas_api_key_project_assignment`) |

Reviewer 3: nit: This table is hard to read when using https://registry.terraform.io/tools/doc-preview, might be worthing just putting as sub titles

Author: changed in [e0ba552](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/pull/3465/commits/e0ba5522547d81dadb5e379cce1fe3f48f9d5faa)

## Before and After: Example Configurations

### Old Pattern (Legacy)
```hcl

> resource "mongodbatlas_project_api_key" "example" {

Reviewer 4: Here and everywhere, consider using a different name.
Instead of `"example"` use `"old/new"`

Author: done!

  description = "example key"
  project_assignment {
    project_id = var.project_id
    role_names = ["GROUP_READ_ONLY"]
  }
}
```

### New Pattern (Recommended)
```hcl
resource "mongodbatlas_api_key" "example" {
  org_id      = var.org_id
  description = "example key"
  role_names  = ["ORG_READ_ONLY"]
}

resource "mongodbatlas_api_key_project_assignment" "example" {
  project_id = var.project_id
  api_key_id = mongodbatlas_api_key.example.api_key_id
  role_names = ["GROUP_READ_ONLY"]
}
```

> ## Migration using import

Reviewer: Remember the "Does this work for modules"? And I think this doesn't, right?

Reviewer: in any case we need an example specific for modules

Author: Because the old resource corresponds to 2 resources, moved block is not possible and this wouldn't work for modules because import is needed. Will add a "Does this work for modules" section

Author: Have added migration path for modules and example for modules  in [0a856bd](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/pull/3465/commits/0a856bdf7c2a516839ca3befeba4d2c21603c3b4) and [b40d686](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/pull/3465/commits/b40d686e3f718b0e0e9c0644bda1f14095c8f0e3)
let me know what you think

If you are migrating from `mongodbatlas_project_api_key` resources already managed in Terraform, **import is required** because each `mongodbatlas_project_api_key` resource is equivalent to one `mongodbatlas_api_key` and one `mongodbatlas_api_key_project_assignment`. This ensures that your existing Atlas API keys and assignments are not deleted and recreated during the migration.

### Best Practices Before Importing
- **Backup your Terraform state file** before making any changes.
- **Review your current usage** of `mongodbatlas_project_api_key` and plan the migration for all affected resources.

> - **Test the migration in a non-production environment** if possible.

Reviewer 4: [nit] I would remove this

Reviewer 5: i think this can be a common section that can be referred in every migration doc, instead of "Review your current usage** of `mongodbatlas_project_api_key`" we can rephrase this to be more generic like "Review your current usage** of deprecate resource or something"

Author: IMO the migration guide should be self-contained, and avoid as much as possible making the reader going out of the doc

### Step-by-Step Migration Guide

1. **Add the new resources to your configuration:**
   ```hcl
   resource "mongodbatlas_api_key" "example" {
     org_id      = var.org_id
     description = "example key"
     role_names  = ["ORG_READ_ONLY"]
   }

   resource "mongodbatlas_api_key_project_assignment" "example" {
     project_id = var.project_id
     api_key_id = mongodbatlas_api_key.example.api_key_id
     role_names = ["GROUP_READ_ONLY"]
   }
   ```
2. **Import the existing API key into the API key resource:**
   ```shell

>    terraform import mongodbatlas_api_key.example <ORG_ID>-<API_KEY_ID>

Reviewer 4: Can we also support `/` instead of `-` to be more consistent?

   ```
3. **Import the existing project assignment into the assignment resource:**
   ```shell
   terraform import mongodbatlas_api_key_project_assignment.example <PROJECT_ID>/<API_KEY_ID>
   ```

> 4. **Remove the old resource from the Terraform state:**

Reviewer 4: Is this a use-case for `import` and `removed` block?

Reviewer: I was thinking the same

Author: yes, I have clarified that removed block can be used

   ```shell
   terraform import mongodbatlas_api_key_project_assignment.new <PROJECT_ID>/<API_KEY_ID>
   ```
4. **Remove the old resource from the Terraform state:**
   ```shell
   terraform state rm mongodbatlas_project_api_key.old
   ```
   This step ensures Terraform will not attempt to delete the underlying Atlas resource. Alternatively a `removed block` (available in Terraform 1.7 and later) can be used to delete it from the state file, e.g.:
   ```terraform
   removed {
    from = mongodbatlas_project_api_key.old
     lifecycle {
      destroy = false
     }
   }
  ```
5. **Remove the old resource block from your configuration**
6. **Run `terraform plan` to review the changes.**
   - Ensure that Terraform does not plan to delete or recreate your API keys or assignments.

>    - **Note:** After import, Terraform may show an in-place update for attributes like `org_id` on the `mongodbatlas_api_key` resource. This is expected and only updates the Terraform state to match your configuration; it does not change the actual resource in Atlas. You can safely apply this change.

Reviewer 3: just curious is this something we can fix in api_key import?

Author: I think we could but not sure if it would be considered as a breaking change or not. To fix it we would need to change the behavior of the Read. If you see the import of the [api_key](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/blob/master/internal/service/apikey/resource_api_key.go#L186) resource, the encoded `Id` attribute is set, and then on the [Read](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/blob/master/internal/service/apikey/resource_api_key.go#L96-L97), more attributes are set but not `org_id`, so when the terraform apply after the import is done, a change is detected. e.g.
```
Terraform used the selected providers to generate the following execution plan. Resource actions are indicated with the following symbols:
  ~ update in-place

Terraform will perform the following actions:

  # module.api_key_assignment.mongodbatlas_api_key.this will be updated in-place
  ~ resource "mongodbatlas_api_key" "this" {
      ~ description = "Legacy module-managed API Key" -> "Module-managed API Key"
        id          = "YXBpX2tleV9pZA==:Njg2N2E1ODg2YTdlOGQ0M2Q2ZTdlODFl-b3JnX2lk:NjBkZGY1NWMyN2E1YTIwOTU1YTcwN2Q3"
      + org_id      = "60ddf55c27a5a20955a707d7"
        # (3 unchanged attributes hidden)
    }

Plan: 0 to add, 1 to change, 0 to destroy.
```

open to discuss if this change is worth doing now

Reviewer 5: if org_id will be set every time in Read() then this would be a breaking change as it would result in non-empty plans right?

Author: its just the first apply after the import. Because when importing the org_id is not set in the state, in the apply it is, but this only happens once when importing the mongodbatlas_api_key resource. 

> then this would be a breaking change as it would result in non-empty plans right

I wouldn't consider it a breaking change because this is part of a "migration" and more specifically, an import operation. A non-empty plan would mean a breaking change in the case of not changing anything from the Terraform configuration, upgrading the provider and then having a non-empty plan.

Reviewer 5: makes sense. 
[q] why is org_id is not set in the state when importing? maybe I'm missing something
is it a bug in the read?

Author: I think it's a problem of the combination of import/read. Read assumes that required attributes are present(in this case org_id) and Import assumes that Read sets all required values. Considering that the api_key resource uses SDKv2, this is something that might have been overlooked when implementing it.

Reviewer: can we set it in the import? https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/blob/master/internal/service/apikey/resource_api_key.go#L161 

in any case, I think if we don't fix it we should release a warning message in the operation method, saying what you are saying in this guide

Author: After doing some test, I have fixed the import and adjusted the guide. See [257fc9b](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/pull/3465/commits/257fc9b8fefbaaad57f419307a0af606669072b1)

If you are using modules to manage your API key assignments, migrating from `mongodbatlas_project_api_key` to the new pattern requires special attention. Because the old resource corresponds to two new resources (`mongodbatlas_api_key` and `mongodbatlas_api_key_project_assignment`), you cannot simply move the resource block inside your module and expect Terraform to handle the migration automatically. This section demonstrates how to migrate from a module using the legacy `mongodbatlas_project_api_key` resource to a module using the new `mongodbatlas_api_key` and `mongodbatlas_api_key_project_assignment` resources.

**Key points for module users:**
- You must use `terraform import` to bring existing API keys and assignments into the new resources, even when they are managed inside a module.
- The import command must match the resource address as used in your module (e.g., `module.<module_name>.mongodbatlas_api_key.<name>`).
- After import, remove the old resource from your configuration and state as described below.

**Example import commands for modules:**
```shell
terraform import 'module.<module_name>.mongodbatlas_api_key.<name>' <ORG_ID>-<API_KEY_ID>

> terraform import 'module.<module_name>.mongodbatlas_api_key_project_assignment.<name>' <PROJECT_ID>/<API_KEY_ID>

Reviewer: Some customers who have platform and app teams have very distinct responsibilities. App teams, who would be the ones having to run this comment, don't have access to `import` capabilities. I think this should be converted into adding the `import` block in the configuration rather than as a command. I believe that should work

Reviewer: I am also very worried that this is the only suggestion we can make. Imagine a very big customer with hundreds of app teams, each team is expected to do that if they want to migrate to our recommended approach. That's never going to happen.

is the `project_assignment` an idempotent type of resource? What I mean is: if `mongodbatlas_api_key_project_assignment` is being created in TF but that assignment already exists, will it fail? or simply succeed? if that's the case we could recommend a `moved` from `project_api_key` to `api_key` and then the `mongodbatlas_api_key_project_assignment` would be defined as "new" resources

Author: added explicit mention of import block throughout the doc in [ec95e5f](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/pull/3465/commits/ec95e5f77fc8c51b0171bddec55a2e66746f255c).

Author: No, project_assignment is not idempotent, if we try to create an assignment that already exists, the API fails

```
mongodbatlas_api_key_project_assignment.this: Creating...
╷
│ Error: error creating resource
│ 
│   with mongodbatlas_api_key_project_assignment.this,
│   on main.tf line 59, in resource "mongodbatlas_api_key_project_assignment" "this":
│   59: resource "mongodbatlas_api_key_project_assignment" "this" {
│ 
│ https://cloud-dev.mongodb.com/api/atlas/v2/groups/6627aa2fe2a3d04ed82a990e/apiKeys/686d200e697d1f4c02ef5738 POST: HTTP 400 Bad Request (Error code: "API_KEY_ALREADY_IN_GROUP")
│ Detail: API key is already in the group. Reason: Bad Request. Params: [], BadRequestDetail: 
```

Reviewer: @oarbusi thanks for the mention of import block but I am not sure it really helps with what I am saying. We can't give this recommendation to customers of using the `import` from the root module for the reason I've said before.

I have these considerations:
1. Clarify in the upgrade guide that this migration is not required and if users are using the `mongodbatlas_project_api_key` they can continue doing so
2. Add a **limitations** section in the module migration explaining `import` doesn't work inside the module and `moved` wouldn't be helpful
3. Can you bring up this topic in the technical sync? With the inefficiencies of the import method, one alternative would be to instrument our `_assignment` resources with a `create_succeeds_if_already_exists` field, which would basically solve the problem here as well as in all other assignment resources

Author: I have done point 1 and 2 in [34bcc0a](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/pull/3465/commits/34bcc0a242062735045e4c7d97f08bc1dc615b55). Will add this to the technical sync

     }
   }
   ```
2. **Add the new resources:**
   ```hcl
   resource "mongodbatlas_api_key" "example" {
     org_id      = var.org_id
     description = "example key"
     role_names  = ["ORG_READ_ONLY"]
   }

   resource "mongodbatlas_api_key_project_assignment" "example" {
     project_id = var.project_id
     api_key_id = mongodbatlas_api_key.example.api_key_id
     role_names = ["GROUP_READ_ONLY"]
   }
   ```
3. **Remove the old resource:**
   - Delete or comment out the `mongodbatlas_project_api_key` block.
4. **Update references:**
   - Change any references from `mongodbatlas_project_api_key.example.api_key_id` to `mongodbatlas_api_key.example.api_key_id`.
5. **Apply the changes:**
   - Run `terraform plan` to review the changes.
   - Run `terraform apply` to apply the migration.

## FAQ
**Q: Can I assign the same API key to multiple projects?**
A: Yes, simply create multiple `mongodbatlas_api_key_project_assignment` resources for each project.

**Q: Do I need to change anything for existing keys?**
A: Existing keys will continue to work, but we recommend following the migration guide to move to the new pattern.

**Q: What if I have many project assignments?**

> A: You can use `for_each` or `count` with `mongodbatlas_api_key_project_assignment` to manage multiple assignments efficiently.

Reviewer 4: Do we have any examples of this?

Reviewer: good point

Author: I think there's no need, for_each count are terraform features. I added links to the official documentation for this features

**Q: Where can I find a working example?**

> A: See [examples/mongodbatlas_api_key/main.tf](../../examples/mongodbatlas_api_key/main.tf).

Reviewer 4: Use an absolute link, in case this guide is in the terraform registry

Author: Changed

## Further Resources

> - [Terraform MongoDB Atlas Provider Documentation](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/mongodb/mongodbatlas/latest/docs)

Reviewer 4: Are all these links necessary? What about docs.mongodb.com?

Author: You are right, I only kept the resource link

## Why do we have both `mongodbatlas_project_api_key` and the new pattern?

Historically, the `mongodbatlas_project_api_key` resource allowed users to create and assign API keys to projects in a single step. However, this approach limited flexibility, especially for organizations managing many projects or requiring more granular control. The new pattern—creating API keys independently and assigning them to projects with `mongodbatlas_api_key_project_assignment`—offers greater flexibility, clarity, and aligns with best practices for infrastructure as code.

## Why should I migrate?
- **Flexibility:** Manage API keys and assignments independently.
- **Clarity:** Clear separation of key creation and project assignment.
- **Best Practices:** Aligns with Terraform and Atlas recommendations for resource management.

## Will `mongodbatlas_project_api_key` continue to work?

While this is not our recommended approach, you can still continue to use the `mongodbatlas_project_api_key` resource. If you are creating a new configuration, use the `mongodbatlas_api_key_project_assignment` resource.

> ## Does this work for modules?

Reviewer: Thanks for the section, but I would remove it from here and put this text into "## Migration using Modules"

Author: Makes sense, done in [dc0790b](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/pull/3465/commits/dc0790b9e08557320fc3996e154b92a717723d31)

---

> page_title: "Migration Guide: Project API Key to API Key + Assignment"

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
page_title: "Migration Guide: Project API Key to API Key + Project Assignment"
```

   ```
   Alternatively a `removed block` (available in Terraform 1.7 and later) can be used to delete it from the state file.
4. **Remove the old module block from your configuration.**
5. **Run `terraform plan` to review the changes.**
   - Ensure that Terraform does not plan to delete or recreate your API keys or assignments.
6. **Run `terraform apply` to apply the migration.**

For complete working examples, see:
- [Old module example](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/blob/master/examples/mongodbatlas_api_key_assignment/module/old_module/)
- [New module example](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/blob/master/examples/mongodbatlas_api_key_assignment/module/new_module/)

## Limitations When Migrating Modules

- **Importing inside modules:** Terraform's `import` block cannot be placed inside a module's source code—`import` blocks are only supported in the root module. To migrate resources managed by a module, you must use the `import` block from the root configuration, specifying the full resource address (e.g., `module.<module_name>.resource_type.resource_name`).

> - **Moved blocks are not helpful:** The `moved` block in Terraform is designed for refactoring resources with the same type and similar addresses. In this migration, because you are splitting one resource into two different resource types, `moved` blocks cannot be used to automate the migration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Moved blocks from one to many resources:** The [`moved`](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/moved) block in Terraform is designed for refactoring resources with the same type and similar addresses. In this migration, because you are splitting one resource into two different resource types, `moved` blocks cannot be used to automate the migration.
```

- [Old module example](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/blob/master/examples/mongodbatlas_api_key_assignment/module/old_module/)
- [New module example](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/blob/master/examples/mongodbatlas_api_key_assignment/module/new_module/)

## Limitations When Migrating Modules

> - **Importing inside modules:** Terraform's `import` block cannot be placed inside a module's source code—`import` blocks are only supported in the root module. To migrate resources managed by a module, you must use the `import` block from the root configuration, specifying the full resource address (e.g., `module.<module_name>.resource_type.resource_name`).

Reviewer: don't we have a GH issue on Terraform side about this? I was talking with @lantoli and seems we don't, but checking also with @AgustinBettati and @EspenAlbert to see if they remember it
